The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gay life in Paris, Multum in parvo
library, vol. 2, no. 18, June, 1895, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Gay life in Paris, Multum in parvo library, vol. 2, no. 18, June,
       1895

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: November 21, 2022 [eBook #69400]

Language: English

Produced by: Demian Katz, Craig Kirkwood, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (Images courtesy
             of the Digital Library@Villanova University.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAY LIFE IN PARIS, MULTUM IN
PARVO LIBRARY, VOL. 2, NO. 18, JUNE, 1895 ***


Transcriber’s Note:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *

MULTUM IN PARVO LIBRARY.

Entered at the Boston Post Office as second class matter.

Vol. 2. JUNE, 1895. Published Monthly. No. 18.




GAY LIFE IN PARIS.


  How Life is Enjoyed by the
  People of that Great
  Metropolis.

  Smallest Magazine in the world. Subscription price
  50 cts. per year. Single Copies 5 cts. each.

  PUBLISHED BY
  A. B. COURTNEY,
  Room 74, 45 Milk Street,
  BOSTON, MASS.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE QUEEN OF THE MABILLE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

GAY LIFE IN PARIS.




Preface.


There is an old Italian proverb, “See Naples and die,” but the French
paraphrase it in a more pleasant way and say “See Paris and pray to
live there until the end of the world.” It is with some of the females
of Paris that we have to deal in this little book. Life in the great
Metropolis is far different from the comparatively sober method of
living in our American cities. A well known journalist says: “Men and
women plunge into the lovely city as into a bath of pleasure, buffet
with the breakers, float a brief time on the cosy sea of life there,
and are then sucked down in the dark and sinister depths where ruin,
disease and death lay in wait for the prey they are sure of in the
end.” Of course this writer doesn’t mean that all men and women get
into the evil way, but he does mean that a greater proportion are
tempted by evil in Paris than in any other place.




The Jardin Mabille.


The day of the Jardin Mabille went by several years yet, but the
memories of it remain. The nearest approach to it, at present, is an
establishment in the Latin quarter of Paris. The Mabille was a very
elaborately and artistically arranged garden, a maze of thickets,
odorous with flowers. It had an immense closed hall for winter use.
Here once a week was held a masked ball which lasted from Saturday
night to daybreak of the Sabbath. The wickedest dances, notably the
can-can and the hula-hula, were invariably reserved for the closing
hours of the affair. The women who frequented these balls were bad,
yes, very bad, and they were met there by men in all walks of life.
Even Napoleon III has visited this den of iniquity incognito. The
writer of this had occasion to visit the Jardin Mabille and other
similar places in Paris once in company with a detective. One of the
notable dances seen was the bacchanal or wine dance. It is accompanied
with the most astonishing sensational effects. The gas burns low,
loud gongs bray dismally, cymbals clash, and the hall is brilliantly
illuminated with red and blue and green fires, amongst which pistols
are discharged and shrieks are heard in various parts of the room.
Never was a madder scene enacted in real life than the bacchanal and
the valentine on New Year’s eve. But is it real life after all, or is
it only Paris and a kind of giddy dream? We, who come only to look on
and to renew our feeble, but I trust virtuous, indignation at such
sights, turn at last from the girls in boys’ clothes and the boy in
girls’ clothes; from the jaunty sailor girl-boy who has just ridden
around the room on the shoulders of her captain; from the Queen of
Darkness who swept past us in diamonds and sables and never so much as
suffered her languishing eyes to rest for a moment on any one of us;
from the misery of the jealous one in the corner who has been robbed of
his prize, and the melancholy of the two who are advising one another
to go home, for they have each had more than enough; from all this we
turn at last and find the streets blank and cold, and over the roofs
comes the sound of bells that are calling the faithful to prayer.

As a resort the Jardin Mabille ranked about with the Sixth Avenue dives
of New York. The general class of patrons were the same at both. The
attractions are the loose women; the attracted the silly, young and old
men.

I have encountered there grave American business men and government
officials, and famous actresses and _prima donnæ_, bent on
investigating the gilded vice for which the Mabille has become
notorious. Indeed, the experience was said to be one without which
one’s knowledge of Paris was incomplete, and as long as the Jardin
Mabille existed, it never lacked patrons to make its sugared infamy
profitable. God be thanked that this vile institution is of the past,
and it is our regret that some French Parkhurst does not arise and
clean out the similar establishments whose gilded doors are open as the
reader is perusing this.

[Illustration: A PAIR OF FRENCH DANCERS.]




Ballet Dancers.


The reader may be supposed to be familiar with the architectural
splendors of the Paris Opera House. To some minds these splendors will
perhaps become more vivid when it is said that they cost 40,000,000
francs, say $8,000,000. I omit all general description and pass at
once behind the scenes to the _foyer de la danse_ or green-room of the
ladies of the ballet.

It is a splendid room, decorated with allegorical panels and mirrors.
All around the room run bars fixed against the wall, and covered with
red velvet. The dancing “subjects” use these bars to stretch and twist
their legs, and to exercise the muscles of their backs. Before the
fireplace stand the children and small fry of the ballet. On each side
of the fire, dozing and gossiping are the mothers of the figurantes,
armed with baskets and knitting needles. In the middle of the room
is a little group of men, hats in hand, carefully dressed, chatting,
laughing, and apparently waiting for something.

They are the _habitues_, and they are waiting for the arrival of the
_premiers sujets_.

Soon these ladies appear, one by one, walking with that movement of
the hips that only dancers have, the foot turned outward and enveloped
in loose gaiters, which make them look like Cochin China hens. These
gaiters are destined to preserve their satin shoes and stockings from
dust and dirt. With a little watering-pot that they carry with their
finger tips, like shepherdesses in Watteau’s pictures, they proceed to
water about three square feet of floor; then flinging into the glass
a general and collective ogle at the group standing behind them, they
go through a variety of steps, pirouettes, smiles and capers for five
minutes.

Then comes a little repose. The group of men breaks up, and those who
are intimate enough approach and talk to the dancers. What they say
to them is a secret. Meanwhile, the call man cries with a voice like
a rattle, “Gentlemen and ladies, they are beginning.” This is not
true. It is like saying dinner at six for half past. The incident,
however, is useful to those ladies who wish to cut short a tiresome
conversation. The reply is a caper.

After a few minutes the call man returns: “Gentlemen and ladies, they
have begun.”

This time it is almost true. Then the ladies take off their gaiters,
hand the watering-pots to their mothers, to their chamber-maids, or to
the persons who combine these two offices, and with much strutting and
muscular mannerism direct their steps toward the stage.

Those who enjoy the privilege of the entry to the _foyer_ of the opera
are the subscribers, the Ministers, influential journalists, and a few
other persons whom it pleases the director to gratify. All rich folk,
you may be sure, for unless you are rich you cannot be an habitue
of the opera. As Hector Berlioz used to say, “Music is essentially
aristocratic, a girl of noble lineage, that princes alone can endow
nowadays.”




How Divided.


And now let me say a few words about the ladies of the ballet. They
are divided into premiers, sujets, coryphees, figurants and comparses.
I maintain the French terms for the simple reason that there are no
Anglo-Saxon equivalents.

The _corps de ballet_, like an army corps, is composed of platoons,
divided first of all according to the sexes, and then into quadrilles,
first and second. The pay in the second quadrille is 700 to 800 francs
a year; in the first, 900 to 1,000 francs; a _coryphee_ gets 1,200,
1,300, or 1,400 francs. The next stage is _sujet_, with an engagement
of three years and a salary beginning at 1,600 francs and increasing up
to 2,000 francs in the last year.

These are the stages through which the members of the ballet of the
opera pass. And what a hard time they have! Take, for instance, the
_coryphees_ and the members of the two quadrilles. They arrive at the
opera, say a quarter to 9 in the morning, each armed with a leather
bag, containing a pair of stockings, some dancing shoes, a corset, a
chimisette, a comb, a hand mirror, a button hook, a box of face powder,
a piece of bread, two sardines, some potatoes, and a bottle containing
more water than wine.

Each one climbs up to the fifth story and enters a room, where her
comrades of the quadrille are dressing. In five minutes she has put on
her class costume--low necked chimisette, with short sleeves, muslin
skirt, rose-colored stockings, shabby satin shoes, a blue ribbon round
her neck, and in her corset a bunch of brass medals, a piece of red
coral, and two little crosses. These are her fetiches. No danseuse who
respects herself can do anything without her fetiches or lucky charms.

Up two more flights of stairs, she arrives in the large square
instruction room under the cupola, with the floor slightly inclined to
reproduce the slope of the stage. The only furniture is a chair for the
teacher, Mme. Merante, a chair for the violin player, Francois Merante,
and all around the room bars such as we have already seen in the _foyer
de la danse_.

“Take your places, young ladies!” cries Mme. Merante. The girls place
themselves at the bar, and holding it now with the right hand and now
with the left, twist and dislocate their bodies in every possible
fashion. This is only a preparation for the lesson proper. After these
exercises, the teacher calls the pupils into the middle of the room,
and then begin the figures and pirouettes. If our heroine is ambitious,
she will not be content with the lesson alone, but undertake in a
corner by herself a number of intricate and peculiar dislocations
during the intervals of repose.

The lesson is over. It is 11 o’clock. The girls hurry to their
dressing-rooms to change their linen, after which they breakfast in
company on sardines, radishes, sour apples, gossip and fried potatoes.
At noon the bell rings for rehearsal. The girls have to come down on
the stage, and finish their breakfast while the stage manager calls out
the names and the ballet master talks to the composer. The rehearsal
drags along until 4 o’clock. Then the girls climb up again to their
dressing-room, put on their ordinary clothing, and leave the theatre.

It is 5 o’clock by the time they reach their homes, where their
mothers, worthy _concierges_ or washerwomen, are waiting for their
daughters to peel the potatoes for dinner. They have only time to
wash, to hurry through their dinner, and return to the opera in time
for the first act. A _coryphee_, for instance, will play a page in
the first act, appear in the second, and take part in the ballet in
the third. During the fourth act she remains in her dressing-room, and
does a little crochet, but hardly has she done a few points before
the call man’s voice is heard in the lobbies: “Ladies, the fourth act
is finished.” She changes her costume, scampers down the stairs, and
rushes upon the stage. The curtain falls. The _coryphee_ regains her
dressing-room, puts on her ordinary clothes, and leaves the theatre.
It is nearly 1 o’clock when she reaches her home, and, after eating a
bit of bread and cheese while she undresses, she creeps into her narrow
bed. Her day’s work is over.




Hard Labor for Girls.


Indeed, there is but little poetry in the existence of the smiling and
light-footed dancers whose pirouettes afford so much pleasure to the
old gentlemen in the orchestra stalls. They begin often at the age of
5 or 6 in the _class des petites_, and then every day in the year they
practice and toil and chatter and caper until from _rats_ they become
successful _figurantes_ at the rate of one franc a night, members of
the first and second quadrilles, _coryphees_ and _sujets_. Then at the
end of their first three years’ engagement begins a period of bitter
grief. For then it often happens that, instead of encouraging them and
giving them a decent salary, the administration of the opera chooses
its stars from among foreigners.




A Borrowed Mother.


The _danseuse_ always has a mother; if the fates cut the thread of the
days of her natural parent, she will borrow, hire, or buy a new one.
It is an article of primary necessity. The mother holds her daughter’s
shawl in the wings, watches her dance, covers her shoulders when her
_pas_ is over, and offers her a little bottle of cold beef tea to
quench her thirst and keep up her strength. Take for a sample mother
Mme. N., who begins her day as a fruit seller at 6 o’clock in the
morning. She mounts into her little cart and trots off to the Central
Market, where she lays in her provision of cabbages, turnips, carrots,
and salads. Then, on summer evenings, about 8 o’clock, a tall lackey
enters her shop, and Mme. N., dressed in her Sunday best, gets into
Mons. de P’s victoria and takes a ride in the Bois de Boulogne with her
daughter. Mme. N. is a living encyclopædia, a gazette of the market and
of the court.

[Illustration]




French Female Beauties.


If you enjoy nice photographs of female beauties, here is your
opportunity. For only ten cents, we will send to you forty photographs
of the most charming French girls in tights. Each photograph is mounted
on a card and the lot of 40 card photos makes an exquisite, unique and
_petite_ collection. Ordinarily, you know, pictures of actresses in
tights cost ten cents each, but here we make the remarkable offer of
forty separate card photographs. Send ten cents, silver or stamps, to
Keystone Book Co., Box 1634, Philadelphia, Pa., or to the firm from
whom you purchased this little volume.




Incident in a Dive.


One day when the writer of this was visiting one of the low dives of
Paris, in company with a detective, the latter said to him:

“Do you see that fellow at the third right-hand table, reading a
letter to a drunken woman? He is an ex-lawyer’s clerk who has gone
to the dogs through strong drink. He hangs round pot-houses and, for
a drink, writes begging letters and bogus letters of reference for
customers. Every time he is arrested for being drunk his pockets are
full of well-written notes, addressed to prominent people, recommending
meritorious cases of necessity to their notice. The next table is
occupied by two prostitutes smoking cigarettes, and a couple of
sneaking blackguards who secretly sell obscene pictures and transparent
cards on the boulevards. Still further on are a lot of the ‘bankers’
or hawkers, who sell newspapers and pamphlets with loud cries of ‘Last
night’s murder!’ or ‘Frightful scandal--full and minute particulars!’
Mixed in with them are street singers, street musicians and other
Bohemians of the lowest class.”




Unmasked.


On receipt of 30 cents we will send, postpaid, a large book entitled
“Mabille Unmasked.” It tells of the wickedest place in the world, how
it was started, who have patronized it, and what has happened there. It
is one of the greatest sensational books of the age. A notable feature
is that it is full of pictures taken from life. Send 30 cents, stamps,
to U. S. Supply Co., Box 329, Lynn, Mass. Another sensational book is
entitled “Coney Island Frolics.” It is profusely illustrated. Sent
postpaid for 30 cents by U. S. Supply Co.




Deep In Sin.


At the entrance to the Rue de Trois Portes, the writer made a sudden
move. “Here’s a poor, ragged woman lying stretched out on the sidewalk.
She looks as if she might be dead.”

“Dead drunk,” responded the Chief of Detectives, cynically. “Even
animal life seems suspended. Do you detect a very loathsome smell? It
is a combination of all the drinks and perfumes popular among women of
her kind. She is still young--hardly thirty years old.” Between her
thick lips gleamed fine white teeth. She must have been pretty at one
time.

“How disgusting she looks, all plastered over with mud.”

“She is what they call a ‘sidewalker.’”

“What’s that?”

“It is the slang name for a class of prostitutes whose only home is
the scaffolding round some old house that is being pulled down, or
some new one that is being built. They carry on their trade in the
open air under bridges, in the trenches of the fortifications, in back
alleys, where there are no janitors. Once a week, regularly, this one
fetches up in the station-house. She comes lawfully by her drunkenness.
Her mother died in hospital of delirium tremens. Her father committed
suicide while drunk. She herself has almost got to the end of her rope.
Some day, coming out of a pot-house, she’ll drop dead in the street,
and then she’ll be on show, for the last time, at the Morgue. Although
known to thousands, nobody will claim her body, and she will be turned
over to the medical school for dissection.”

“What was her parents’ business?”

“Her mother’s trade could not be classified. Her father was a
perambulating ‘fence,’ who used to peddle stolen goods from door to
door.”




A Hellish Babel.


A saloon called “The Senate” contained tables almost touching each
other, at which customers, male and female, were packed like herrings
in a barrel.

The uproar was something indescribable. Some were shouting, some were
screaming, some were reciting obscene verses. Five or six indecent
choruses were being sung at the same time. Language of incredible
foulness was roared from one to another, shrieks of drunken laughter
and the crash of broken glass were incessant.

To overhear one’s neighbor, one had to bend his ear right to his mouth.
The solitary waiter, sweating like a runaway horse, was in evil humor.
Woe to the man who stood in his way.

Everything was paid for in advance, and all drinks cost 15 centimes
(7-1/2 cents).

The decorations of this dive are its most remarkable
characteristic--for the paintings on the walls, which were singularly
well executed, were filthy and obscene beyond description. Human
beings, male and female, were represented, life size, engaged in
performances and operations which are never mentioned even among
savages.

[Illustration: ADIEU--ALA FRANCAISE.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Note:

Punctuation has been made consistent.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAY LIFE IN PARIS, MULTUM IN
PARVO LIBRARY, VOL. 2, NO. 18, JUNE, 1895 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
